_articles/private-instance-variables-in-javascript.md, before:

<!--
{
  "layout": "article",
  "title": "Real Private Members in JavaScript",
  "date": "2014-03-01T21:59:57-08:00",
  "draft": true,
  "tags": [
    "JavaScript"
  ]
}
-->

In many programming languages, it's common to prefix a variable or method name with an underscore to signal to other developers that it's private. JavaScript is no different. Many of the more popular JavaScript style guides ([airbnb](https://github.com/airbnb/javascript#naming-conventions), [Dojo](http://dojotoolkit.org/community/styleGuide#Naming_Conventions), [aloha](http://aloha-editor.org/guides/style_guide.html#code-conventions)) suggest doing this.

Ironically, most of them, immediately after making this recommendation, warn readers against accessing these private members outside of the class definition. Dojo says, "The [private] method or property is not intended for use by anything other than the class itself", and Alhoa offers this kind advice: "If you use methods that are [marked private] you are on your own."

If you're coming from another language, you might be scratching your head right now. *Wait, if it's private, how can someone access it outside of the class definition?*

Well, therein lies the problem. In JavaScript all properties of all objects are public &mdash; all the time. This naming convention is used to signal intent, but that's all it does. It doesn't enforce anything.

[Douglas Crockford](http://javascript.crockford.com/code.html#names) has this to say on the subject:

> Do not use _ (underbar) as the first character of a name. It is sometimes used to indicate privacy, but it does not actually provide privacy. If privacy is important, use the forms that provide private members. Avoid conventions that demonstrate a lack of competence.

You won't hear me say this often, but I agree with Douglas Crockford here. It's time that we, the JavaScript community (myself included), take privacy seriously.

There are [many compelling reasons](http://programmers.stackexchange.com/questions/143736/why-do-we-need-private-variables) to use private members, and not a single one of them is solved with a naming convention alone. It's short sighted to merely say, "If someone uses a private variable out of scope, that's their problem". Because chances are, it's going to be your problem too.

## Privacy in JavaScript Today

In JavaScript it's really easy to make variables and functions private. Unfortunately, as I've already explained, it's not possible to make properties of objects private.

This can be a real problem in situations where you need to manage instance state (or in JavaScript terms, manage properties on `this`). No private properties means that any code that has access to the instance can alter its state in any way it wants.

Here's an example of how I see most JavaScript code written today:

```javascript
function Car() {
  this._mileage = 0;
}

Car.prototype.drive(miles) {
  if (typeof miles == 'number' && miles > 0) {
    this._mileage += miles;
  } else {
    throw new Error('drive only accepts positive numbers');
  }
}

Car.prototype.readMileage() {
  return this._mileage;
}
```

This is a pretty basic `Car` class with a single private member and two accessor methods. As you can see, the `drive` method takes a number and increments the mileage property of the `Car` instance, and like any good method, it checks to make sure the input is valid before applying it, otherwise you could end up with bad data.

The problem is that this check doesn't actually protect against bad data because at any point, anyone with access to the instance could manually change the `_mileage` property.

```javascript
var honda = new Car();
honda._mileage = 'pwned';
```

So how can we protect against bad data if properties cannot be private? How can we ensure that the state of our instances are safe from outside tampering?

### A Step Closer

It's true that properties cannot be made private, but setting properties on an instance aren't the only way to manage its state. There could be another object that is uniquely linked to the instance that is responsible for storing its state. And this second object *could* actually be private.

Here's an example of how that might look:

```javascript
var Car = (function() {

  // Create an store to hold the private objects.
  var privateStore = {};
  var uid = 0;

  function Car(mileage) {
    // Use a unique ID to reference this instance
    // in the private store.
    privateStore[this.id = uid++] = {}
    // Store private stuff in the private store
    // instead of on `this`.
    privateStore[this.id].mileage = mileage || 0;
  }

  Car.prototype.drive = function(miles) {
    if (typeof miles == 'number' && miles > 0)
      privateStore[this.id].mileage += miles;
    else
      throw new Error('drive can only accept positive numbers')
  };

  Car.prototype.readMileage = function() {
    return privateStore[this.id].mileage;
  };

  return Car;
}());
```

In the above code, you give each instance a unique ID, and then everywhere you would have previously written `this._mileage` you now write `privateStore[this.id].mileage` which points to an object that is only accessible inside the closure created by the [IIFE](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immediately-invoked_function_expression). This object holds all of the private data and it's truly private. You can pass `Car` instances around to external code and that code can't modify the instance state.

As I said before, this method works, but it has a number of downsides:

* There's too much extra code to type. If you have tens or hundreds of modules, it will quickly become a burden.
* You have to store an ID property on each instance, which is both annoying and potentially conflicting depending on the property name you choose.
* By using the object `privateStore[this.id]` instead of `this` you lose access to the instance's prototype.
* It's not memory efficient. Since the `privateStore` object holds a reference to each of the private instance objects, none of those objects can be garbage collected. If the public instance goes away it will be impossible to access those private properties, but they'll still be taking up space in memory. In other words, it's a memory leak.

Whether these downsides trump the downsides of not actually having privacy is hard to say and depends on the situation. Based on the amount of code I've seen using this strategy (approximately zero code), I'd say developers prefer leaking private variables to all this boilerplate.

In any case, we can do better than this.

## What Does a Good Solution Look Like?

Before looking at other solutions to this issue, I think it would be helpful to define what a good solution is. What are the goals we're trying to achieve? If we can clearly define our goals then we can measure any solution against how close it gets to the ideal.

This is my personal list of must-haves before I'd consider using a new privacy technique in a real project:

* The way to declare and access a private property should be simple, convenient, and intuitive.
* It should be clear from the code whether or not a property is private.
* Private properties should only be accessible in the scope in which they're defined.
* The prototype of `this` in the context of a private method should include the instance's prototype, so private methods can call public methods if they wish.
* Dynamic changes to the instance or the instance's prototype at runtime should never expose any private properties (lexical scoping rules should still apply).
* The solution should be memory efficient.

### My Attempt

I wanted to solve this problem for myself and my own code, so I spent some time trying to improve upon the code in the previous example. Like I said, that solution works (meaning it actually provides privacy), and if I could hide away some of the boilerplate, it would be much more approachable.

An obvious optimization is that all setup code should be abstracted away into its own module. Creating the private store and mapping each new instance to an object that holds the private properties could all happen behind the scenes.

A second optimization is that if the private object used to hold the instance members were created using `Object.create`, I could set its prototype to whatever I wanted. In this case, I want the prototype of the private object to be same as the prototype of the public instance (or some object that has the instance's prototype in its prototype chain). That way prototype methods are shared rather than copied.

Finally, with ES6 [WeakMaps](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/WeakMap) (or using a WeakMap [shim](https://github.com/Benvie/WeakMap)) we now have a data structure that can associate objects with other objects (traditional objects in JavaScript can only have string keys). This means we can avoid having to put a unique ID on each instance. It also means we can avoid the garbage collection issue since WeakMaps don't create strong references to the objects they hold.

I wanted to take these optimizations for a test drive, so I wrote a small module to do it.

### Introducing "Private Parts"

The Private Parts module provides a simple and intuitive way to achieve true private methods and properties in JavaScript. It builds on the common convention to use an underscore to represent something private, while providing actual (rather than nominal) privacy.

Using Private Parts is very easy, and honestly it's mostly just syntactic sugar. The gist is that whenever you have a property that you want to be private, instead of writing `this.prop` you write `_(this).prop`.

The `_()` function, which I refer to as the key function, accepts an object (the "public instance") and returns a new object (the "private instance") that is uniquely linked to the passed object so you can store private properties on it, and those properties can't be access by anyone else. It's called it a key function because it provides secure, one-way access to the private instance. Without it, the private instance is completely inaccessible. I chose the underscore as the variable name for the key function because it's short and is often used to connote privacy. But you can choose whatever you like.

The magic behind the key function is it's scope &mdash; where it's defined. Since the key function is the only way to access the private instance data, where you define that key determines which scope has access to the private instance. Usually you'll define it within your class or module, making it impossible for external code to access your instance variables.

Here's the previous example redone using Private Parts:

```javascript
var Car = (function() {

  // Create the key function.
  **var _ = PrivateParts.createKey()**;

  function Car(mileage) {
    // Store the mileage property privately.
    **_(this)**.mileage = mileage;
  }

  Car.prototype.drive = function(miles) {
    if (typeof miles == 'number' && miles > 0) {
      **_(this)**.mileage += miles;
    } else {
      throw new Error('drive only accepts positive numbers');
    }
  }

  Car.prototype.readMileage = function() {
    return **_(this)**.mileage;
  }

  return Car;
}());
```

As you can see, this is surprisingly similar to the original example. I've highlighted the differences and they're minimal, yet offer real privacy.

```javascript
var honda = new Car();
honda.drive(500);

// Private properties are no longer accessible globally!
console.log(honda.mileage); // undefined
```

### Private Methods

Private methods have always been semi-possible in JavaScript thanks to dynamic `this` and the function methods `call` and `apply`:

```javascript
// Some function in a closure.
function privateMethod() {
  this.doSomething();
}

// The public method can call the above function
// and retain the `this` context.
SomeClass.prototype.publicMethod = function() {
  privateMethod.call(this);
}
```

But using `call` or `apply` isn't as convenient as invoking a private method directly on an object, plus it doesn't allow for chaining of multiple methods together.

Private Parts has a solution to this problem.

The `createKey` function accepts an optional parameter that, when passed, is used as the prototype for any private instances created by that key. This passed object is essentially a "private prototype". It's in the prototype chain, but it's only accessible to the private instances (not the public ones).

```javascript
var privateMethods = {
  privateMethodOne: function() { /* ... */ },
  privateMethodTwo: function() { /* ... */ }
}

var _ = require('private-parts').createKey(privateMethods);

SomeClass.prototype.publicMethod = function() {
  // Now the private methods can be invoked
  // directly on the private instances.
  _(this).privateMethodOne();
  _(this).privateMethodOne();
}
```

Most strategies for making private methods in JavaScript involve each new instance getting a copy of each private method. That works, but it's unnecessarily wasteful. Using a prototype object is far more efficient because it allows all instances to share the same function objects.

It's worth noting that in some cases, a private method might need to call a public method. In order for that to work, the private methods object needs to have the constructor's prototype in its prototype chain as well. That will enable the `this` context within private methods to have access to both private and public methods. Here's how you'd do that:

```javascript
var privateMethods = Object.create(SomeClass.prototype);
privateMethods.privateMethodOne = function() { /* ... */ };
privateMethods.privateMethodTwo = function() { /* ... */ };

var _ = require('private-parts').createKey(privateMethods);
```

Now the prototype chain for private instances includes the private methods object as well as the constructor prototype:

```javascript
// The prototype chain for private instances
_(this)  >>>  privateMethods  >>>  SomeClass.prototype
```

Hopefully this isn't too confusing, but in case it is, the [GitHub README](https://github.com/philipwalton/private-parts#controlling-the-prototype-chain) goes into more detail about how the prototype chain and how you can control it.

## Conclusion

I don't want to present this method as the one true way to do private properties in JavaScript, but I do think it's a lot cleaner than anything I've tried before. If others know of a better way, I'd love to hear it.

The point I do want to stress is that I think we need to do something.

Fake privacy shouldn't be an option. JavaScript as a language is incredibly flexible and provides many different ways to achieve true privacy. We should use them.

The notions of privacy and encapsulation have existed for a long time and are staples of programming best practices. No one questions there usefulness. The mere fact that so much JavaScript codes uses the underscore convention is proof that JavaScript developers get it.

But we don't need nominal privacy. We need real privacy.

## Further Reading

- [Private Properties: Mozilla Developer Network](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/Add-ons/SDK/Guides/Contributor_s_Guide/Private_Properties)
- [Private Members in JavaScript: Douglas Crockford](http://javascript.crockford.com/private.html)
- [Private instance members with weakmaps in JavaScript: Nicholas C. Zakas](http://www.nczonline.net/blog/2014/01/21/private-instance-members-with-weakmaps-in-javascript/)

Commit message:

Fix a few mistakes and add a subclasses section.

_articles/private-instance-variables-in-javascript.md, after:

<!--
{
  "layout": "article",
  "title": "Real Private Members in JavaScript",
  "date": "2014-03-01T21:59:57-08:00",
  "draft": true,
  "tags": [
    "JavaScript"
  ]
}
-->

In many programming languages, it's common to prefix a variable or method name with an underscore to signal to other developers that it's private. JavaScript is no different. Many of the more popular JavaScript style guides ([airbnb](https://github.com/airbnb/javascript#naming-conventions), [Dojo](http://dojotoolkit.org/community/styleGuide#Naming_Conventions), [aloha](http://aloha-editor.org/guides/style_guide.html#code-conventions)) suggest doing this.

Ironically, most of them, immediately after making this recommendation, warn readers against accessing these private members outside of the class definition. Dojo says, "The [private] method or property is not intended for use by anything other than the class itself", and Alhoa offers this kind advice: "If you use methods that are [marked private] you are on your own."

If you're coming from another language, you might be scratching your head right now. *Wait, if it's private, how can someone access it outside of the class definition?*

Well, therein lies the problem. In JavaScript all properties of all objects are public &mdash; all the time. This naming convention is used to signal intent, but that's all it does. It doesn't enforce anything.

[Douglas Crockford](http://javascript.crockford.com/code.html#names) has this to say on the subject:

> Do not use _ (underbar) as the first character of a name. It is sometimes used to indicate privacy, but it does not actually provide privacy. If privacy is important, use the forms that provide private members. Avoid conventions that demonstrate a lack of competence.

You won't hear me say this often, but I agree with Douglas Crockford here. It's time that we, the JavaScript community (myself included), take privacy seriously.

There are [many compelling reasons](http://programmers.stackexchange.com/questions/143736/why-do-we-need-private-variables) to use private members, and not a single one of them is solved with a naming convention alone. It's short sighted to merely say, "If someone uses a private variable out of scope, that's their problem". Because chances are, it's going to be your problem too.

## Privacy in JavaScript Today

In JavaScript it's really easy to make variables and functions private. Unfortunately, as I've already explained, it's not possible to make properties of objects private.

This can be a real problem in situations where you need to manage instance state (or in JavaScript terms, manage properties on `this`). No private properties means that any code that has access to the instance can alter its state in any way it wants.

Here's an example of how I see most JavaScript code written today:

```javascript
function Car() {
  this._mileage = 0;
}

Car.prototype.drive(miles) {
  if (typeof miles == 'number' && miles > 0) {
    this._mileage += miles;
  } else {
    throw new Error('drive only accepts positive numbers');
  }
}

Car.prototype.readMileage() {
  return this._mileage;
}
```

This is a pretty basic `Car` class with a single private member and two accessor methods. As you can see, the `drive` method takes a number and increments the mileage property of the `Car` instance, and like any good method, it checks to make sure the input is valid before applying it, otherwise you could end up with bad data.

The problem is that this check doesn't actually protect against bad data because at any point, anyone with access to the instance could manually change the `_mileage` property.

```javascript
var honda = new Car();
honda._mileage = 'pwned';
```

So how can we protect against bad data if properties cannot be private? How can we ensure that the state of our instances are safe from outside tampering?

### A Step Closer

It's true that properties cannot be made private, but setting properties on an instance aren't the only way to manage its state. There could be another object that is uniquely linked to the instance that is responsible for storing its state. And this second object *could* actually be private.

Here's an example of how that might look:

```javascript
var Car = (function() {

  // Create an store to hold the private objects.
  var privateStore = {};
  var uid = 0;

  function Car(mileage) {
    // Use a unique ID to reference this instance
    // in the private store.
    privateStore[this.id = uid++] = {}
    // Store private stuff in the private store
    // instead of on `this`.
    privateStore[this.id].mileage = mileage || 0;
  }

  Car.prototype.drive = function(miles) {
    if (typeof miles == 'number' && miles > 0)
      privateStore[this.id].mileage += miles;
    else
      throw new Error('drive can only accept positive numbers')
  };

  Car.prototype.readMileage = function() {
    return privateStore[this.id].mileage;
  };

  return Car;
}());
```

In the above code, you give each instance a unique ID, and then everywhere you would have previously written `this._mileage` you now write `privateStore[this.id].mileage` which points to an object that is only accessible inside the closure created by the [IIFE](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immediately-invoked_function_expression). This object holds all of the private data and it's truly private. You can pass `Car` instances around to external code and that code can't modify the instance state.

As I said before, this method works, but it has a number of downsides:

* There's too much extra code to type. If you have tens or hundreds of modules, it will quickly become a burden.
* You have to store an ID property on each instance, which is both annoying and potentially conflicting depending on the property name you choose.
* By using the object `privateStore[this.id]` instead of `this` you lose access to the instance's prototype.
* It's not memory efficient. Since the `privateStore` object holds a reference to each of the private instance objects, none of those objects can be garbage collected. If the public instance goes away it will be impossible to access those private properties, but they'll still be taking up space in memory. In other words, it's a memory leak.

Whether these downsides trump the downsides of not actually having privacy is hard to say and depends on the situation. Based on the amount of code I've seen using this strategy (approximately zero code), I'd say developers prefer leaking private variables to all this boilerplate.

In any case, we can do better.

## What Does a Good Solution Look Like?

Before looking at other solutions to this issue, I think it would be helpful to define what a good solution is. What are the goals we're trying to achieve? If we can clearly define some goals then we can measure any solution against how close it gets to the ideal.

This is my personal list of must-haves before I'd consider using a new privacy technique in a real project:

* The way to declare and access a private property should be simple, convenient, and intuitive.
* It should be clear from the code whether or not a property is private.
* Private properties should only be accessible in the scope in which they're defined.
* The prototype of `this` in the context of a private method should include the instance's prototype, so private methods can call public methods if they wish.
* Dynamic changes to the instance or the instance's prototype at runtime should never expose any private properties (lexical scoping rules should still apply).
* The solution should be memory efficient.

### My Attempt

I wanted to solve this problem for myself and my own code, so I spent some time trying to improve upon the code in the previous example. Like I said, that solution works (meaning it actually provides privacy), and if I could hide away some of the boilerplate, it would be much more approachable.

An obvious optimization is that all setup code should be abstracted away into its own module. Creating the private store and mapping each new instance to an object that holds the private properties could all happen behind the scenes.

A second optimization is that if the private object used to hold the instance members were created using `Object.create`, I could set its prototype to whatever I wanted. In this case, I want the prototype of the private object to be same as the prototype of the public instance (or some object that has the instance's prototype in its prototype chain). That way prototype methods are shared rather than copied.

Finally, with ES6 [WeakMaps](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/WeakMap) (or using a WeakMap [shim](https://github.com/Benvie/WeakMap)) we now have a data structure that can associate objects with other objects (traditional objects in JavaScript can only have string keys). This means we can avoid having to put a unique ID on each instance. It also means we can avoid the garbage collection issue since WeakMaps don't create strong references to the objects they hold.

I wanted to take these optimizations for a test drive, so I wrote a small module to do it.

### Introducing "Private Parts"

The Private Parts module provides a simple and intuitive way to achieve true private methods and properties in JavaScript. It builds on the common convention to use an underscore to represent something private, while providing actual (rather than nominal) privacy.

Using Private Parts is very easy, and honestly it's mostly just syntactic sugar. The gist is that whenever you have a property that you want to be private, instead of writing `this.prop` you write `_(this).prop`.

The `_()` function, which I refer to as the key function, accepts an object (the "public instance") and returns a new object (the "private instance") that is uniquely linked to the passed object so you can store private properties on it, and those properties can't be access by anyone else. It's called it a key function because it provides secure, one-way access to the private instance. Without it, the private instance is completely inaccessible. I chose the underscore as the variable name for the key function because it's short and is often used to connote privacy. But you can choose whatever you like.

The magic behind the key function is it's scope &mdash; where it's defined. Since the key function is the only way to access the private instance data, where you define that key determines which scope has access to the private instance. Usually you'll define it within your class or module, making it impossible for external code to access your instance variables.

Here's the previous example redone using Private Parts:

```javascript
var Car = (function() {

  // Create the key function.
  **var _ = PrivateParts.createKey()**;

  function Car(mileage) {
    // Store the mileage property privately.
    **_(this)**.mileage = mileage;
  }

  Car.prototype.drive = function(miles) {
    if (typeof miles == 'number' && miles > 0) {
      **_(this)**.mileage += miles;
    } else {
      throw new Error('drive only accepts positive numbers');
    }
  }

  Car.prototype.readMileage = function() {
    return **_(this)**.mileage;
  }

  return Car;
}());
```

As you can see, this is surprisingly similar to the original example. I've highlighted the differences and they're minimal, yet offer real privacy.

```javascript
var honda = new Car();
honda.drive(500);

// Private properties are no longer accessible globally!
console.log(honda.mileage); // undefined
```

### Private Methods

Private methods have always been semi-possible in JavaScript thanks to dynamic `this` and the function methods `call` and `apply`:

```javascript
// Some function in a closure.
function privateMethod() {
  this.doSomething();
}

// The public method can call the above function
// and retain the `this` context.
SomeClass.prototype.publicMethod = function() {
  privateMethod.call(this);
}
```

But using `call` or `apply` isn't as convenient as invoking a private method directly on an object, plus it doesn't allow for chaining of multiple methods together.

Private Parts has a solution to this problem.

The `createKey` function accepts an optional parameter that, when passed, is used as the prototype for any private instances created by that key. This passed object is essentially a "private prototype". It's in the prototype chain, but it's only accessible to the private instances (not the public ones).

```javascript
var privateMethods = {
  privateMethodOne: function() { /* ... */ },
  privateMethodTwo: function() { /* ... */ }
}

var _ = require('private-parts').createKey(privateMethods);

SomeClass.prototype.publicMethod = function() {
  // Now the private methods can be invoked
  // directly on the private instances.
  _(this).privateMethodOne();
  _(this).privateMethodOne();
}
```

Most strategies for making private methods in JavaScript involve each new instance getting a copy of each private method. That works, but it's unnecessarily wasteful. Using a prototype object is far more efficient because it allows all instances to share the same function objects.

It's worth noting that in some cases, a private method might need to call a public method. In order for that to work, the private methods object needs to have the constructor's prototype in its prototype chain as well. That will enable the `this` context within private methods to have access to both private and public methods. Here's how you'd do that:

```javascript
var privateMethods = Object.create(SomeClass.prototype);
privateMethods.privateMethodOne = function() { /* ... */ };
privateMethods.privateMethodTwo = function() { /* ... */ };

var _ = require('private-parts').createKey(privateMethods);
```

Now the prototype chain for private instances includes the private methods object as well as the constructor prototype:

```javascript
// The prototype chain for private instances
_(this)  >>>  privateMethods  >>>  SomeClass.prototype
```

Hopefully this isn't too confusing, but in case it is, the [GitHub README](https://github.com/philipwalton/private-parts#controlling-the-prototype-chain) goes into more detail about how the prototype chain and how you can control it.

## What About Subclasses?

Many languages have this notion of "protected" variables and methods. They're like private, but their reach extends to subclasses and (depending on the language) the namespace or package.

Private Parts does not, out of the box, attempt to address this use case. Key function access is based on scope, and if your subclasses is defined in a different scope or module, invoking methods defined in the superclass from the scope of the subclass won't work. They keys will be different.

I spent a good deal of time trying to make this work because I really wanted to have some holy-grail solution. But at the end of the day I decided it wasn't worth it. Ultimately, there are things that JavaScript is good at and things it's not, and the amount of ceremony required to make protected work just didn't seem worth it, and moreover seemed to be a misuse of the language.

If you're curious as to what my attempt looked like, check out my [Mozart](https://github.com/philipwalton/mozart) module or [this demo](http://bbenvie.com/articles/2012-07-25/JavaScript-Classes-with-private-protected-and-super) by [Brandon Benvie](http://bbenvie.com/), which Mozart was based on.

## Conclusion

I don't want to present this method as the one true way to do private properties in JavaScript, but I do think it's a lot cleaner than anything I've tried before. If others know of a better way, I'd love to hear it.

The point I do want to stress is that I think we need to do something.

Fake privacy shouldn't be an option. JavaScript as a language is incredibly flexible and provides many different ways to achieve true privacy. We should use them.

The notions of privacy and encapsulation have existed for a long time and are staples of programming best practices. No one questions there usefulness. The mere fact that so much JavaScript codes uses the underscore convention is proof that JavaScript developers get it.

But we don't need nominal privacy. We need real privacy.

## Further Reading

- [Private Properties: Mozilla Developer Network](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/Add-ons/SDK/Guides/Contributor_s_Guide/Private_Properties)
- [Private Members in JavaScript: Douglas Crockford](http://javascript.crockford.com/private.html)
- [Private instance members with weakmaps in JavaScript: Nicholas C. Zakas](http://www.nczonline.net/blog/2014/01/21/private-instance-members-with-weakmaps-in-javascript/)
