_articles/stopping-event-propagation-breaks-the-web.md, before:

<!--
{
  "layout": "article",
  "title": "Stopping Event Propagation Breaks the Web",
  "date": "2014-04-29T21:02:45-07:00",
  "draft": true,
  "codepen": true,
  "tags": [
    "JavaScript",
    "HTML"
  ]
}
-->

If you're a web developer, at some point in your career you've probably had to build a popup or dialog that dismissed itself after the user clicked anywhere else on the page. If you searched online for how to do this, chances are you came across this Stack Overflow question: [How to detect a click outside an element?](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/152975/how-to-detect-a-click-outside-an-element).

Here's what the highest rated answer recommends:

```javascript
$('html').click(function() {
  // Hide the menus if visible.
});

$('#menucontainer').click(function(event){
  event.stopPropagation();
});
```

This answer can be summarized as follows: If a click event propagates to the `<html>` element, hide the menus. If the click event originated inside `#menucontainer`, stop the event so it will never reach `<html>`, thus only clicks outside of `#menucontainer` will cause the menus to be hidden.

The above code is simple, elegant, and clever all at the same time. Yet, unfortutely, it's absolutely horrible advice.

This solution is roughly equivalent to fixing a leaky shower by turning off the water to the bathroom. It completely ignores the possibility that any other code on the page might needs to know about that click event.

Still, it's the most upvoted answer to this question, so most people take it as sound advice.

## The Problem with Events

Like a lot of things in JavaScript, DOM events are global. And as most people know, global variables make for messy, coupled code.

Modifying a single, fleeting event might not seem like a big deal, but as the use of third-party frameworks increases, altering browser-defined behavior can lead to some disastrous bugs. Bugs that, from my experience, are a nightmare to track down.

When you stop an event from propagating up to the document, you're changing expectations in a way that libraries authors can't possibliy predict or defend against. This problem is magnified by the increasing popularity of [event delegation](http://www.nczonline.net/blog/2009/06/30/event-delegation-in-javascript/). Every time you stop an event from propagating through the DOM, you're potentially causing a bug in some other code on the page.

## What Can Go Wrong?

You might be thinking to yourself: who even writes code like this anymore? I use Bootstrap (or some other UI library) to do all this stuff so I can just stop reading, right?

Well, no. Unfortunately stopping event propagation is not just something recommended by bad Stack Overflow answers; it's also found in some of the most popular libraries in use today.

To prove this, let me show you how easy it is to create a bug by using Bootstrap and Rails out of the box.

Rails ships with a JavaScript library called [jquery-ujs](https://github.com/rails/jquery-ujs) that allows developers to declaratively add remote ajax calls to links via the `data-remote` attribtue.

In the following example, if you open the dropdown and click anywhere else in the frame, the dropdown closes itself. However, if you open the dropdown and click on the "Remote Link", it doesn't work.

<div class="CodepenContainer">
  <div class="codepen" data-height="250" data-slug-hash="KzHjc" data-default-tab="result"></div>
</div>

This bug happens because the Bootstrap code responsible for closing the dropdown menu is listening for click events on the document. But since jquery-ujs stops event propagation in its `date-remote` link handlers, those clicks never cause the Bootstrap code to run, so the dropdown stays open.

The worst part about this bug is that there's absolutely nothing the Bootstrap authors can do to prevent stuff like this from happening. If you're writing code that deals with the DOM, you're always at the mercy of whatever other code is running on the page. Such is the nature of global variables.

As a quick disclaimer, I'm not trying to single out jquery-ujs, I just happen to know this problem exists because I [encountered it myself](https://github.com/rails/jquery-ujs/issues/327) and had to work around it. In truth, tons of other libraries, including Bootstrap, stop event propagation. It's a big deal all over the web.

## Why Do People Stop Event Propagation?

I already showed that there's some bad advice on the Internet promoting the use of `stopPropagation`, but that isn't the only reason people do it.

I'd bet that a very large percentage of the time, developer stop event propagation without even realizing it.

### Return false

In the olden days of inline event handlers you'd frequently see stuff like this in people's code:

```xml
<a href="#" onclick="return false">Link</a>
```

Return false here is used to prevent the browser from attempting to find an empty hash fragment on the page. But `return false` is actually doing more than just preventing this default behavior, it's also stopping the propagation of that event.

Returning false is basically the same as:

```javascript
event.preventDefault();
event.stopPropagation();
```

In my opinion, you should never return false from any event handler, even if you intend for this to happen. It's better to be explicit so your intentions are clear to other developers on your team.

**Note:** If you use CoffeeScript (which automatically returns the last expression in a function) make sure you don't end your event handlers with anything the evaluates to `false`.

###  Performance

Back in the days of IE6 and other terribly slow browsers, a complicated DOM could really slow down your site. And since events travel through the entire DOM, the more nodes you have, the slower everything is.

Peter Paul Koch of [quirksmode.org](http://www.quirksmode.org/js/events_order.html) recommended this practice in an old article on the subject:

> if your document structure is very complex (lots of nested tables and such) you may save system resources by turning off bubbling. The browser has to go through every single ancestor element of the event target to see if it has an event handler. Even if none are found, the search still takes time.

With today's modern browsers, however, there is essentially no noticeable performance gain from stopping event propagation. Unless you absolutely know what you are doing and very strictly control all the code on your pages, I do not recommend this approach.

## What To Do Instead

As a general rule, stopping event propagatin should never be a solution to a difficult coding challenge. Instead, stopping propagation should only ever be used for one purpose: to make it as if the event never happened.

In the "How to detect a click outside of an element?" example above, the purpose of calling `stopPropagation` isn't to get rid of the click event altogether, it's to avoid running some code that will hide the menu in one particular situation.

In addition to this being a bad idea because it alters global behavior, it's also a bad idea because it puts the menu hiding code in two different and unrelated places making it much for fragile than necessary.

A much better solution is to have a single event handler whose logic is fully ensapsulated and whose sole responsiblity is to determine whether or not the menu should be hidden for a given event.

As it turns out, the better option ends up requiring less code:

```javascript
$(document).on('click', function(event) {
  if (!$(event.target).closest('#menucontainer').length) {
    // Hide the menus.
  }
})
```

The above handler listens for clicks on the document and checks to see if the event target is `#menucontainer` or has `#menucontainer` as a parent. If it doesn't, you know the click originated from outside of `#menucontainer`, and you can hide the menus if they're visible.

I'm sure some readers will notice that this solution requires a bit more DOM traversal than the original. Hopefully I've convinced you that this is negligible, especially for something as infrequent as a click event. I will gladly trade a few microseconds of DOM lookup today if it lowers the likelihood of spending a few hours tracking down bugs in the future.

### Prevent Default

Frequently people use `stopPropagation` or `return false` when all they really want to do is prevent the browser's default behavior from happening.

Let's say you have a link on your site that users can click on the share the current page on Twitter. The actual link points to a URL on twitter.com but rather than going there you want to run some JavaScript that opens a classic Twitter share popup instead.

In order to prevent the browser from actually navigation to twitter.com, you need to tell it to `preventDefault`.

Imagine you also have some code on your site that uses Google Analytics to track link clicks to external domains. Maybe it looks like this:

```javascript
$(document).on('click', 'a', function() {
  if (this.hostname != 'css-tricks.com') {
    ga('send', 'event', 'Outbound Link', this.href);
  }
})
```

If you want to exclude link clicks like the Twitter button that don't actually take you away from the current page, it might be tempting to stop those events from propagating. But a much better approach is to inspect the event to see if `preventDefault` has been called.

You know if the event target was a link and `preventDefault` was invoked, the browser wouldn't actually navigate to the URL, so instead of stopping event propagation, you can just inspect the event object.

```javascript
$(document).on('click', 'a', function() {
  // Ignore this event if preventDefault has been called.
  if (event.defaultPrevented) return;

  if (this.hostname != 'css-tricks.com') {
    ga('send', 'event', 'Outbound Link', this.href);
  }
})
```

By doing it this way you correctly track only the link clicks you want without breaking other functionality on the page (e.g. an open Bootstrap dropdown).

In my experience, a large portion of the code I see using `stopPropagation` could easily be rewritten to check `event.defaultPrevented` instead. The next time you're faced with this dilemma, think about what you're really trying to accomplish.

## Conclusion

Pretty much everything I've said so far could be summed up with a few simple rules of thumb. Treat events as global variables. Don't alter them unless you really want them to be altered globally, for all other code on the site. Event handler logic should be limited in scope and should not depend on other event handlers to work.

If you're ever not sure what to do, just remember the Bootstrap dropdown example I showed earlier. Remind yourself that if you're writing a click handler that stops event propagation, an open Bootstrap dropdown will fail to close. So ask yourself, is that okay?

If the answer is "no" (and it usually is) you should find another way.

Commit message:

Finish first draft of the stop propagation article.

_articles/stopping-event-propagation-breaks-the-web.md, after:

<!--
{
  "layout": "article",
  "title": "Stopping Event Propagation Breaks the Web",
  "date": "2014-04-29T21:02:45-07:00",
  "draft": true,
  "codepen": true,
  "tags": [
    "JavaScript",
    "HTML"
  ]
}
-->

If you're a web developer, at some point in your career you've probably had to build a popup or dialog that dismissed itself after the user clicked anywhere else on the page. If you searched online for how to do this, chances are you came across this Stack Overflow question: [How to detect a click outside an element?](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/152975/how-to-detect-a-click-outside-an-element).

Here's what the highest rated answer recommends:

```javascript
$('html').click(function() {
  // Hide the menus if visible.
});

$('#menucontainer').click(function(event){
  event.stopPropagation();
});
```

This answer can be summarized as follows: If a click event propagates to the `<html>` element, hide the menus. If the click event originated inside `#menucontainer`, stop the event so it will never reach `<html>`, thus only clicks outside of `#menucontainer` will cause the menus to be hidden.

The above code is simple, elegant, and clever all at the same time. Yet, unfortutely, it's absolutely horrible advice.

This solution is roughly equivalent to fixing a leaky shower by turning off the water to the bathroom. It completely ignores the possibility that any other code on the page might needs to know about that click event.

Still, it's the most upvoted answer to this question, so most people take it as sound advice.

## The Problem with Events

Like a lot of things in JavaScript, DOM events are global. And as most people know, global variables make for messy, coupled code.

Modifying a single, fleeting event might not seem like a big deal, but as the use of third-party frameworks increases, altering browser-defined behavior can lead to some disastrous bugs. Bugs that, from my experience, are a nightmare to track down.

When you stop an event from propagating up to the document, you're changing expectations in a way that libraries authors can't possibliy predict or defend against. This problem is magnified by the increasing popularity of [event delegation](http://www.nczonline.net/blog/2009/06/30/event-delegation-in-javascript/). Every time you stop an event from propagating through the DOM, you're potentially causing a bug in some other code on the page.

## What Can Go Wrong?

You might be thinking to yourself: who even writes code like this anymore? I use Bootstrap (or some other UI library) to do all this stuff so I can just stop reading, right?

Well, no. Unfortunately stopping event propagation is not just something recommended by bad Stack Overflow answers; it's also found in some of the most popular libraries in use today.

To prove this, let me show you how easy it is to create a bug by using Bootstrap and Rails out of the box.

Rails ships with a JavaScript library called [jquery-ujs](https://github.com/rails/jquery-ujs) that allows developers to declaratively add remote ajax calls to links via the `data-remote` attribtue.

In the following example, if you open the dropdown and click anywhere else in the frame, the dropdown closes itself. However, if you open the dropdown and click on the "Remote Link", it doesn't work.

<div class="CodepenContainer">
  <div class="codepen" data-height="250" data-slug-hash="KzHjc" data-default-tab="result"></div>
</div>

This bug happens because the Bootstrap code responsible for closing the dropdown menu is listening for click events on the document. But since jquery-ujs stops event propagation in its `date-remote` link handlers, those clicks never cause the Bootstrap code to run, so the dropdown stays open.

The worst part about this bug is that there's absolutely nothing the Bootstrap authors can do to prevent stuff like this from happening. If you're writing code that deals with the DOM, you're always at the mercy of whatever other code is running on the page. Such is the nature of global variables.

As a quick disclaimer, I'm not trying to single out jquery-ujs, I just happen to know this problem exists because I [encountered it myself](https://github.com/rails/jquery-ujs/issues/327) and had to work around it. In truth, tons of other libraries, including Bootstrap, stop event propagation. It's a big deal all over the web.

## Why Do People Stop Event Propagation?

I already showed that there's some bad advice on the Internet promoting the use of `stopPropagation`, but that isn't the only reason people do it.

I'd bet that a very large percentage of the time, developer stop event propagation without even realizing it.

### Return false

In the olden days of inline event handlers you'd frequently see stuff like this in people's code:

```xml
<a href="#" onclick="return false">Link</a>
```

Return false here is used to prevent the browser from attempting to find an empty hash fragment on the page. But `return false` is actually doing more than just preventing this default behavior, it's also stopping the propagation of that event.

Returning false is basically the same as:

```javascript
event.preventDefault();
event.stopPropagation();
```

In my opinion, you should never return false from any event handler, even if you intend for this to happen. It's better to be explicit so your intentions are clear to other developers on your team.

**Note:** If you use CoffeeScript (which automatically returns the last expression in a function) make sure you don't end your event handlers with anything the evaluates to `false`.

###  Performance

Back in the days of IE6 and other terribly slow browsers, a complicated DOM could really slow down your site. And since events travel through the entire DOM, the more nodes you have, the slower everything is.

Peter Paul Koch of [quirksmode.org](http://www.quirksmode.org/js/events_order.html) recommended this practice in an old article on the subject:

> if your document structure is very complex (lots of nested tables and such) you may save system resources by turning off bubbling. The browser has to go through every single ancestor element of the event target to see if it has an event handler. Even if none are found, the search still takes time.

With today's modern browsers, however, there is essentially no noticeable performance gain from stopping event propagation. Unless you absolutely know what you are doing and very strictly control all the code on your pages, I do not recommend this approach.

## What To Do Instead

As a general rule, stopping event propagatin should never be a solution to a difficult coding challenge. Instead, stopping propagation should only ever be used for one purpose: to make it as if the event never happened.

In the "How to detect a click outside of an element?" example above, the purpose of calling `stopPropagation` isn't to get rid of the click event altogether, it's to avoid running some code that will hide the menu in one particular situation.

In addition to this being a bad idea because it alters global behavior, it's also a bad idea because it puts the menu hiding code in two different and unrelated places making it much for fragile than necessary.

A much better solution is to have a single event handler whose logic is fully ensapsulated and whose sole responsiblity is to determine whether or not the menu should be hidden for a given event.

As it turns out, the better option ends up requiring less code:

```javascript
$(document).on('click', function(event) {
  if (!$(event.target).closest('#menucontainer').length) {
    // Hide the menus.
  }
})
```

The above handler listens for clicks on the document and checks to see if the event target is `#menucontainer` or has `#menucontainer` as a parent. If it doesn't, you know the click originated from outside of `#menucontainer`, and you can hide the menus if they're visible.

I'm sure some readers will notice that this solution requires a bit more DOM traversal than the original. Hopefully I've convinced you that this is negligible, especially for something as infrequent as a click event. I will gladly trade a few microseconds of DOM lookup today if it lowers the likelihood of spending a few hours tracking down bugs in the future.

### Prevent Default

Frequently people use `stopPropagation` or `return false` when all they really want to do is prevent the browser's default behavior from happening.

Let's say you have a link on your site that users can click on the share the current page on Twitter. The actual link points to a URL on twitter.com but rather than going there you want to run some JavaScript that opens a classic Twitter share popup instead.

In order to prevent the browser from actually navigation to twitter.com, you need to tell it to `preventDefault`.

Imagine you also have some code on your site that uses Google Analytics to track link clicks to external domains. Maybe it looks like this:

```javascript
$(document).on('click', 'a', function() {
  if (this.hostname != 'css-tricks.com') {
    ga('send', 'event', 'Outbound Link', this.href);
  }
})
```

If you want to exclude link clicks like the Twitter button that don't actually take you away from the current page, it might be tempting to stop those events from propagating. But a much better approach is to inspect the event to see if `preventDefault` has been called.

You know if the event target was a link and `preventDefault` was invoked, the browser wouldn't actually navigate to the URL, so instead of stopping event propagation, you can just inspect the event object.

```javascript
$(document).on('click', 'a', function() {
  // Ignore this event if preventDefault has been called.
  if (event.defaultPrevented) return;

  if (this.hostname != 'css-tricks.com') {
    ga('send', 'event', 'Outbound Link', this.href);
  }
})
```

By doing it this way you correctly track only the link clicks you want without breaking other functionality on the page (e.g. an open Bootstrap dropdown).

In my experience, a large portion of the code I see using `stopPropagation` could easily be rewritten to check `event.defaultPrevented` instead. The next time you're faced with this dilemma, think about what you're really trying to accomplish.

## Conclusion

Hopefully this article has helped you think about DOM events in a new light. They're not isolated pieces that can be modified without consequence. They're global and interconnected and often affect far more code than you realize.

To avoid bugs, it's almost always best to leave events alone and let them propagate as the browser intended.

If you're ever unsure about what do to, just ask yourself the following question: is it possible that some other code, either now or in the future, might want to know that this event happened? Whether it be as trivial as a Bootstrap modal or as critical event tracking analytics, if something might ever want to know about that event, it's better to leave it alone and find another solution.

Another solution is always possible.
